README.md, before:

## Request for comments

RFCs are used to solicit comments on an idea or proposal.

To create an RFC, use the&nbsp;.

- You'll need to give it a number (you'll find what numbers are free by&nbsp;) and add the label 'rfc'.
- If you're still drafting the RFC, don't give it a number. This will prevent confusion if your RFC is published later than a lower-numbered one.&nbsp;

Ownership & publication

Once created,&nbsp; **you** &nbsp;are responsible for the lifecycle of the RFC, from the initial soliciting of comments from interested parties through to closure with the appropriate status.

- Put a link in the #govuk-developers slack channel
- Change the subject of the #govuk-developers slack channel to the RFC
- Send an email to&nbsp;[govuk-tech-members@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk](mailto:govuk-tech-members@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk)
- Make sure you check "Notify watchers" when publishing the page
- Tell your tech lead, they'll announce it in the tech lead standup and put it in the weeknotes&nbsp;

## Status

RFC statuses are usually one of the following, but you can use additional ones if these don't suit your needs. Ensure that you populate the 'notes' section of the RFC explaining the status and when the next stage of the RFC is due.

- Draft - the RFC is still being drafted and is not yet open for comments
- Open - the RFC is open for comments
- Closing - the RFC is closing for comments
- Closed - the RFC is is now&nbsp;closed for comments, we're not doing anything with this right now.
- Agreed&nbsp;- This proposal has been agreed (link to pages/stories/artefacts that implement the solution in the RFC)
- Not Approved (or Rejected)&nbsp;- This proposal has not been agreed and will not be implemented
- 

Superseded - this RFC has been replaced by a newer RFC (include RFC number in notes section)

## What to write in an RFC

- **"Problem"** section: This section is intended for you to outline the problem that you're trying to solve.&nbsp;Give background information and describe the issues that the proposal aims to address.&nbsp;
- **"Proposal"** section: Outline possible solutions to the problem or suggestions that you'd like to be reviewed. This section shouldn't cover implementation details, it is purely to get feedback on an idea.

Commit message:

Add documentation for the new process

README.md, after:

# GOV.UK Request For Comments

GOV.UK staff use this repository as a forum to discuss and make technical decisions. The outcomes of these discussions can be either an Action Plan, or a new Standard that GOV.UK should follow. This repository is open as a reference for other teams within GDS and wider government.

## Process

1. Create a new branch on this repo and copy `rfc-000-template.md` to `rfc-000-my-proposal.md` and edit.
2. Include any images etc in a separate directory named `rfc-000` and link to them.
3. Make a Pull Request (PR) for your branch.
4. Rename your file and directory with the number of the PR and push as a new commits.
5. Post a link to your PR in #govuk-developers on Slack and to the [govuk-tech-members][govuk-tech-members] Google Group. @mention teams in the PR description if you want particular attention from them.
6. GOV.UK members discuss your proposal using both inline comments against your RFC document and the general PR comments section. Non-technical staff will need to create a free Github account in order to comment.
7. As changes are requested and agreed in comments, make the changes in your RFC and push them as new commits.
8. Stay active in the discussion and encourage and remind other relevant people to participate. If you’re unsure who should be involved in a discussion, ask your Tech Lead or a Lead Developer. If you start an RFC it’s up to you to push it through the process and engage people.
9. Once consensus is reached and approvals given using the Github review system, the PR can be merged.
10. When an RFC is accepted, ensure the GOV.UK Technical community is made aware of it via Slack and the Google Group.
11. An RFC can be rejected. This can happen if a consensus isn’t reached, or people agree rejecting it is the right thing to do. In this case the PR should be closed with a suitable comment.

## Managing Standards

Standards RFCs shouldn’t be substantially altered after they are accepted, although it’s fine to correct typos and other mistakes via a new PR. In order to change a Standard, the original RFC must be superseded by a new one. The process for this is:

1. Create a new RFC PR as above, noting in the summary which RFC it is superseding.
2. In the same branch, mark the old RFC as superseded and link to the new RFC and move (using `git mv`) it into the archived directory.
3. When the new RFC is accepted and the PR is merged, the old RFC will no longer be active.

## Managing Action Plans
For RFCs where the outcome is an agreed Action Plan, you may want to update the RFC with meaningful status updates in new PRs. Once the plan is either complete or no longer relevant, it should be moved to the archived directory in a new PR.

## Historical RFCs

Some RFCs in this repository were migrated from Confluence. They’ve been automatically converted to Markdown, so some formatting might be incorrect. Please fix any issues as you find them in new PRs.

[govuk-tech-members]: https://groups.google.com/a/digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk/forum/#!forum/govuk-tech-members
