rfc-126-custom-configuration-for-dependabot.md, before:

# Custom configuration for Dependabot

## Summary

Introduce stricter configuration for Dependabot to reduced number of open PRs, number of deployments and effort required to ensure apps always use the latest version of libraries that we care about.

## Problem

Dependabot was enabled across all our applications in 2018. Due to the number of applications we have and libraries we use, keeping on top of the number of PRs raised by Dependabot has been difficult.

A few solutions have been implemented in the past to make this better:

- [govuk-dependencies] shows the list of open PRs grouped by application, team or gem.
- [govuk-dependencies] has a Slack bot which automatically messages in each team's channel with a list of open PRs.
- We [allowed merging Dependabot PRs without requiring two approvals][rfc-103].
- [Sharing the responsibility for Dependabot PRs across multiple teams][dependencies-team].
- We've configured Dependabot to [only update top-level dependencies in some repos][top-level-dependencies].
- [bulk-merger] was developed to make it easier to review and merge Dependabot PRs in bulk.

[govuk-dependencies]: http://govuk-dependencies.herokuapp.com/
[rfc-103]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/master/rfc-103-merge-dependabot-pull-requests-with-a-single-review.md
[dependencies-team]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/pull/2168
[top-level-dependencies]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/126#discussion_r439333182
[bulk-merger]: https://github.com/alphagov/bulk-merger

Although these have made improvements to the process, the number of open PRs remains unmanageable. At the time of writing, there are 135 open PRs, of which there are [8 labelled as security fixes][security-prs], the oldest being 21 days old. Dependabot is currently configured to have at most 5 open PRs per repo, which means this number is not the true number and often new PRs will open the moment existing ones are closed down.

[security-prs]: https://github.com/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3Aapp%2Fdependabot-preview+user%3Aalphagov+archived%3Afalse+is%3Aopen+label%3Asecurity

This high number of open PRs is felt particularly hard by the Platform Health team, as they currently [own 55 out of 73 applications][application-owners].

[application-owners]: https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/apps/by-team.html

By having so many open PRs, it becomes difficult to be able to prioritise important updates (bug fixes, security fixes, internal updates) over new versions which simply adds new features (which our apps don't necessarily use anyway). This leads to important updates being left for long periods of time and our desire to close down all the PRs means developers spend time investigating and fixing complex problems without any benefit.

### Statistics

I pulled together [some statistics on our Dependabot usage][dependabot-stats]:

- A total of 17,526 PRs have been opened since we started using Dependabot.
- 8,528 are from [our own internal libraries][dependabot-stats-internal] (for example `govuk_publishing_components`).
- 1013 are [core requirements for our apps][dependabot-stats-framework] (for example `rails`).
- 675 are security fixes.
- 7,378 are other libraries.

[dependabot-stats]: https://github.com/thomasleese/dependabot-stats
[dependabot-stats-internal]: https://github.com/thomasleese/dependabot-stats/blob/bf2d5848f99516962c1b3742fd16883f34541c86/dependabot_stats/analyse.py#L125
[dependabot-stats-framework]: https://github.com/thomasleese/dependabot-stats/blob/bf2d5848f99516962c1b3742fd16883f34541c86/dependabot_stats/analyse.py#L126

<details>
    <summary>Full results</summary>

```
All PRs
=======
Total PRs: 17526
Mean time to merge: 2 days, 15:35:42.556088
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: acts-as-taggable-on (146 days, 3:40:01), paper_trail (85 days, 7:45:33), rails-controller-testing (84 days, 3:29:26), mini_magick (41 days, 4:15:20), gds-sso (38 days, 17:12:39)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: actionview (0:05:42), miller-columns-element (0:05:36), faraday_middleware (0:03:30), webrick (0:01:17), nltk (0:01:14)

Security PRs
============
Total PRs: 675
Mean time to merge: 1 day, 22:01:29.564444
Max time to merge: 40 days, 18:54:18
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: secure_headers (28 days, 4:50:14), doorkeeper (19 days, 7:14:41), excon (15 days, 7:26:22), jquery-rails (13 days, 9:40:30), rack (11 days, 14:55:34)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: json (0:52:52), sprockets (0:38:34), rack-protection (0:19:10), actionview (0:05:42), webrick (0:01:17)

Non-security PRs
================
Total PRs: 16851
Mean time to merge: 2 days, 16:17:56.279271
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: acts-as-taggable-on (146 days, 3:40:01), paper_trail (85 days, 7:45:33), rails-controller-testing (84 days, 3:29:26), mini_magick (41 days, 4:15:20), excon (41 days, 0:57:48)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: docker-compose (0:12:51), vcr (0:10:44), miller-columns-element (0:05:36), faraday_middleware (0:03:30), nltk (0:01:14)

Security Libraries
==================
Total PRs: 675
Mean time to merge: 1 day, 22:01:29.564444
Max time to merge: 40 days, 18:54:18
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: secure_headers (28 days, 4:50:14), doorkeeper (19 days, 7:14:41), excon (15 days, 7:26:22), jquery-rails (13 days, 9:40:30), rack (11 days, 14:55:34)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: json (0:52:52), sprockets (0:38:34), rack-protection (0:19:10), actionview (0:05:42), webrick (0:01:17)

Internal Libraries
==================
Total PRs: 8528
Mean time to merge: 1 day, 12:06:12.839822
Max time to merge: 154 days, 6:12:55
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: gds-sso (38 days, 17:12:39), govuk_app_config (13 days, 17:41:26), govuk_test (5 days, 0:17:42), plek (2 days, 8:29:52), govspeak (1 day, 9:19:06)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: gds-api-adapters (1 day, 9:03:58), govuk_schemas (6:57:43), rubocop-govuk (1:35:22), govuk_sidekiq (1:09:51), govuk_publishing_components (0:42:20)

Framework Libraries
===================
Total PRs: 1013
Mean time to merge: 5 days, 13:10:44.532083
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: factory_bot_rails (23 days, 4:31:45), sass-rails (13 days, 20:36:55), rails (8 days, 1:23:13.750000), jasmine (4 days, 13:56:06.500000), rspec-rails (1 day, 2:18:37)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: factory_bot_rails (23 days, 4:31:45), sass-rails (13 days, 20:36:55), rails (8 days, 1:23:13.750000), jasmine (4 days, 13:56:06.500000), rspec-rails (1 day, 2:18:37)

Third Party Libraries (Framework + Ignored)
===========================================
Total PRs: 8391
Mean time to merge: 3 days, 20:52:04.355023
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: acts-as-taggable-on (146 days, 3:40:01), paper_trail (85 days, 7:45:33), rails-controller-testing (84 days, 3:29:26), mini_magick (41 days, 4:15:20), excon (41 days, 0:57:48)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: docker-compose (0:12:51), vcr (0:10:44), miller-columns-element (0:05:36), faraday_middleware (0:03:30), nltk (0:01:14)

All Allowed Libraries (Security + Internal + Framework)
=======================================================
Total PRs: 10216
Mean time to merge: 1 day, 22:23:05.722886
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: gds-sso (38 days, 17:12:39), secure_headers (28 days, 4:50:14), factory_bot_rails (23 days, 4:31:45), doorkeeper (19 days, 7:14:41), excon (15 days, 7:26:22)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: govuk_publishing_components (0:42:20), sprockets (0:38:34), rack-protection (0:19:10), actionview (0:05:42), webrick (0:01:17)

Ignored Libraries
=================
Total PRs: 7378
Mean time to merge: 3 days, 15:19:59.342911
Max time to merge: 146 days, 3:40:01
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: acts-as-taggable-on (146 days, 3:40:01), paper_trail (85 days, 7:45:33), rails-controller-testing (84 days, 3:29:26), mini_magick (41 days, 4:15:20), excon (41 days, 0:57:48)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: docker-compose (0:12:51), vcr (0:10:44), miller-columns-element (0:05:36), faraday_middleware (0:03:30), nltk (0:01:14)
```
</details>

## Proposal

We will configure Dependabot to only raise PRs against libraries that fit within one of three categories. Any updates to libraries which don't fit into one of these categories will be ignored and PRs won't be raised for them.

The three categories are:

- [Security updates]
- Internal libraries - these are libraries written by us (for example `gds-api-adapters`, `govuk_publishing_components`)
- Framework libraries - these are libraries which our apps heavily rely on to work (for example `rails`, `rspec-rails`)

These categories have been chosen to ensure we stay up to date on libraries which are important to us while also reducing the number of unnecessary version bumps.

[Security updates]: https://help.github.com/en/github/managing-security-vulnerabilities/configuring-github-dependabot-security-updates#about-github-dependabot-security-updates

### Custom configuration

Dependabot [supports configuration files][dependabot-config] stored in each repo to customise its behaviour. This RFC proposes using a configuration file like the one detailed below in each of our repos.

We've already been trialing this out in [Content Publisher] and [govuk_publishing_components], based on some initial experiements in [Signon].

[dependabot-config]: https://dependabot.com/docs/config-file/
[Content Publisher]: https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/pull/2062
[govuk_publishing_components]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk_publishing_components/pull/1564
[Signon]: https://github.com/alphagov/signon/pull/1426

```yaml
version: 1
update_configs:
  - package_manager: ruby:bundler
    directory: /
    update_schedule: daily
    allowed_updates:
      # Security updates
      - match: { update_type: security }
      - match: { dependency_name: brakeman }
      # Internal gems
      - match: { dependency_name: gds-api-adapters }
      - match: { dependency_name: gds-sso }
      - match: { dependency_name: govspeak }
      - match: { dependency_name: govuk* }
      - match: { dependency_name: rubocop-govuk }
      - match: { dependency_name: plek }
      - match: { dependency_name: scss_lint-govuk }
      # Framework gems
      - match: { dependency_name: factory_bot }
      - match: { dependency_name: jasmine }
      - match: { dependency_name: rails }
      - match: { dependency_name: rspec }
      - match: { dependency_name: rspec-rails }
      - match: { dependency_name: sass-rails }
  - package_manager: javascript
    directory: /
    update_schedule: daily
    allowed_updates:
      # Security updates
      - match: { update_type: security }
      # Internal packages
      - match: { dependency_name: accessible-autocomplete }
      - match: { dependency_name: markdown-toolbar-element }
      - match: { dependency_name: miller-columns-element }
      - match: { dependency_name: paste-html-to-govspeak }
```

### Keeping the configuration up to date

Most of our applications use the same internal and framework libraries, so we'll want a single global configuration across all our apps. At the same time, there might be some libraries used by particular apps which fit within one of the three categories.

Maintaining this file across each of our apps has the potential for it to become out of date with our global configuration. To solve this problem, this RFC proposes that we add functionality to [govuk-saas-config] which ensures the configuration file in each repo is up to date with a single global configuration file. Keeping up to date means ensuring that the individual repo configuration file contains at least the global configuration options plus any extra framework libraries that are used by specific apps (for example `sinatra`) but not used wider across all our apps.

Due to the fact that the configuration file is stored in the Git repo, [govuk-saas-config] will need to raise a PR to keep the configuration in sync rather than writing to the repo directly. This is similar to a script we have for [upgrading Ruby].

[govuk-saas-config]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-saas-config
[upgrading Ruby]: https://github.com/thomasleese/upgrade-ruby-version/blob/7d43077a10c732fc285e0bd6daad2d2c5740e352/main.py#L203-L207

### Possible alternatives

#### Auto-merge

The proposal in this RFC [came from an earlier discussion of enabling auto-merge on our PRs][auto-merge-discussion]. Auto-merge is a feature which means [version bump PRs will automatically be merged][auto-merge] by Dependabot provided the tests are passing and the necessary approvals have been received.

The idea is that by auto-merging our PRs, we wouldn't have to spend so much time dealing with them. However, there are a few reasons why this isn't possible at the moment:

- We require approvals for all our PRs. Merging in the PR isn't what takes up the time, so having them merge automatically would only shave off a small amount of time.
- The auto-merge functionality has to be enabled across the entire Dependabot account. We use a shared account across GDS. For this reason, and others, we [weren't able to turn it on][auto-merge-gds-way].

[auto-merge]: https://dependabot.com/blog/automatic-pull-request-merging/
[auto-merge-discussion]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/18P86EFSZdG8Uv5scbGzVoO8KhA3hkKp80UlzNoIctNE/edit
[auto-merge-gds-way]: https://github.com/alphagov/gds-way/pull/428#discussion_r426502446

#### Limit updates to lockfile

Another option might be to limit Dependabot to only raise PRs against the `Gemfile.lock` file. The lockfile is used to pin a specific version, whereas the `Gemfile` can contain a wider version range (for example `~> 1.0` means `1.0 all the way up to but not including 2.0`). The way this would be set up is that Gems we would want to update would have little to no restriction, whereas Gems we'd prefer to be left would have a more precise version specification.

Unfortunately applying this would mean [we lose the security updates that do require an update to the `Gemfile`][dependabot-security-lockfile].

[dependabot-security-lockfile]: https://github.com/dependabot/feedback/issues/937

#### Major/minor/patch

This solution proposed above ignores all updates for libraries not in one of the three categories, regardless of whether the update is a major, minor or patch update. An alternative might be to include PRs for major updates for other libraries.

Looking through the Dependabot config docs, [it doesn't seem to be possible to enable major updates][dependabot-allowed-updates]. Regardless, major updates tend to be the ones that take the longest time to merge, so enabling them wouldn't reduce much of the workload.

[dependabot-allowed-updates]: https://dependabot.com/docs/config-file/#allowed_updates

#### Opt-out rather than opt-in

Rather than having a list of libraries we allow updating, we could instead [maintain a list of libraries we ignore updates for][dependabot-ignored-updates].

This would allow us to remove the hardest PRs from updates, but it would require us to be more on top of maintaining the list. I'm also not sure how it would work with enabling security updates regardless.

[dependabot-ignored-updates]: https://dependabot.com/docs/config-file/#ignored_updates

## Consequences, risks and measuring success

Using [the statistics from above](#Statistics), we can make some estimates on what affect this would have had if it had been enabled from the beginning: 7378 PRs wouldn't have been raised (10216 rather than the 17526 we've had so far).

In theory, by limiting the number of libraries that get updated by Dependabot, our applications would end up less up to date. However, by prioritising certain libraries over others, we should end up in a situation where our applications are actually _more_ up to date in the areas we care about (security, frameworks, internal libraries). There is a risk involved in not being able to access new features or fixes from ignored libraries, however the reason the library has been ignored is because we're making little use of it in the app (otherwise it should be a framework library). We can always manually upgrade these libraries when we want to, and that should still be encouraged when doing a major update (for example a Rails upgrade).

Another potential risk is that people find the global configuration confusing if it contains libraries not relevant to the app. This may lead to people editing the config and then it being reset the next day. One way to mitigate this would be to add an explanatory comment to the file.

We should also expect to see a reduction in the number of open PRs, and also a reduction in the number of deployments.

A less measurable metric is that we would expect developers to be spending less time fixing issues in Dependabot PRs.

If we see a situation where most days we don't have any new Dependabot PRs, we could think about losening these restrictions and opening up the number of libraries we want to received updates on.

This RFC proposes that we review the situation six months after the deployment of the global Dependabot configuration to ensure that this has made a difference to the workload. This will be achieved by talking to developers and using some updated statistics. This review will be owned by the Platform Health team.

Commit message:

Reword to focus on manual configuration
But also leave the door open for automation in the future.

rfc-126-custom-configuration-for-dependabot.md, after:

# Custom configuration for Dependabot

## Summary

Introduce stricter configuration for Dependabot to reduced number of open PRs, number of deployments and effort required to ensure apps always use the latest version of libraries that we care about.

## Problem

Dependabot was enabled across all our applications in 2018. Due to the number of applications we have and libraries we use, keeping on top of the number of PRs raised by Dependabot has been difficult.

A few solutions have been implemented in the past to make this better:

- [govuk-dependencies] shows the list of open PRs grouped by application, team or gem.
- [govuk-dependencies] has a Slack bot which automatically messages in each team's channel with a list of open PRs.
- We [allowed merging Dependabot PRs without requiring two approvals][rfc-103].
- [Sharing the responsibility for Dependabot PRs across multiple teams][dependencies-team].
- We've configured Dependabot to [only update top-level dependencies in some repos][top-level-dependencies].
- [bulk-merger] was developed to make it easier to review and merge Dependabot PRs in bulk.

[govuk-dependencies]: http://govuk-dependencies.herokuapp.com/
[rfc-103]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/blob/master/rfc-103-merge-dependabot-pull-requests-with-a-single-review.md
[dependencies-team]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/pull/2168
[top-level-dependencies]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-rfcs/pull/126#discussion_r439333182
[bulk-merger]: https://github.com/alphagov/bulk-merger

Although these have made improvements to the process, the number of open PRs remains unmanageable. At the time of writing, there are 135 open PRs, of which there are [8 labelled as security fixes][security-prs], the oldest being 21 days old. Dependabot is currently configured to have at most 5 open PRs per repo, which means this number is not the true number and often new PRs will open the moment existing ones are closed down.

[security-prs]: https://github.com/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3Aapp%2Fdependabot-preview+user%3Aalphagov+archived%3Afalse+is%3Aopen+label%3Asecurity

This high number of open PRs is felt particularly hard by the Platform Health team, as they currently [own 55 out of 73 applications][application-owners].

[application-owners]: https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/apps/by-team.html

By having so many open PRs, it becomes difficult to be able to prioritise important updates (bug fixes, security fixes, internal updates) over new versions which simply adds new features (which our apps don't necessarily use anyway). This leads to important updates being left for long periods of time and our desire to close down all the PRs means developers spend time investigating and fixing complex problems without any benefit.

### Statistics

I pulled together [some statistics on our Dependabot usage][dependabot-stats]:

- A total of 17,526 PRs have been opened since we started using Dependabot.
- 8,528 are from [our own internal libraries][dependabot-stats-internal] (for example `govuk_publishing_components`).
- 1013 are [core requirements for our apps][dependabot-stats-framework] (for example `rails`).
- 675 are security fixes.
- 7,378 are other libraries.

[dependabot-stats]: https://github.com/thomasleese/dependabot-stats
[dependabot-stats-internal]: https://github.com/thomasleese/dependabot-stats/blob/bf2d5848f99516962c1b3742fd16883f34541c86/dependabot_stats/analyse.py#L125
[dependabot-stats-framework]: https://github.com/thomasleese/dependabot-stats/blob/bf2d5848f99516962c1b3742fd16883f34541c86/dependabot_stats/analyse.py#L126

<details>
    <summary>Full results</summary>

```
All PRs
=======
Total PRs: 17526
Mean time to merge: 2 days, 15:35:42.556088
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: acts-as-taggable-on (146 days, 3:40:01), paper_trail (85 days, 7:45:33), rails-controller-testing (84 days, 3:29:26), mini_magick (41 days, 4:15:20), gds-sso (38 days, 17:12:39)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: actionview (0:05:42), miller-columns-element (0:05:36), faraday_middleware (0:03:30), webrick (0:01:17), nltk (0:01:14)

Security PRs
============
Total PRs: 675
Mean time to merge: 1 day, 22:01:29.564444
Max time to merge: 40 days, 18:54:18
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: secure_headers (28 days, 4:50:14), doorkeeper (19 days, 7:14:41), excon (15 days, 7:26:22), jquery-rails (13 days, 9:40:30), rack (11 days, 14:55:34)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: json (0:52:52), sprockets (0:38:34), rack-protection (0:19:10), actionview (0:05:42), webrick (0:01:17)

Non-security PRs
================
Total PRs: 16851
Mean time to merge: 2 days, 16:17:56.279271
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: acts-as-taggable-on (146 days, 3:40:01), paper_trail (85 days, 7:45:33), rails-controller-testing (84 days, 3:29:26), mini_magick (41 days, 4:15:20), excon (41 days, 0:57:48)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: docker-compose (0:12:51), vcr (0:10:44), miller-columns-element (0:05:36), faraday_middleware (0:03:30), nltk (0:01:14)

Security Libraries
==================
Total PRs: 675
Mean time to merge: 1 day, 22:01:29.564444
Max time to merge: 40 days, 18:54:18
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: secure_headers (28 days, 4:50:14), doorkeeper (19 days, 7:14:41), excon (15 days, 7:26:22), jquery-rails (13 days, 9:40:30), rack (11 days, 14:55:34)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: json (0:52:52), sprockets (0:38:34), rack-protection (0:19:10), actionview (0:05:42), webrick (0:01:17)

Internal Libraries
==================
Total PRs: 8528
Mean time to merge: 1 day, 12:06:12.839822
Max time to merge: 154 days, 6:12:55
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: gds-sso (38 days, 17:12:39), govuk_app_config (13 days, 17:41:26), govuk_test (5 days, 0:17:42), plek (2 days, 8:29:52), govspeak (1 day, 9:19:06)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: gds-api-adapters (1 day, 9:03:58), govuk_schemas (6:57:43), rubocop-govuk (1:35:22), govuk_sidekiq (1:09:51), govuk_publishing_components (0:42:20)

Framework Libraries
===================
Total PRs: 1013
Mean time to merge: 5 days, 13:10:44.532083
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: factory_bot_rails (23 days, 4:31:45), sass-rails (13 days, 20:36:55), rails (8 days, 1:23:13.750000), jasmine (4 days, 13:56:06.500000), rspec-rails (1 day, 2:18:37)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: factory_bot_rails (23 days, 4:31:45), sass-rails (13 days, 20:36:55), rails (8 days, 1:23:13.750000), jasmine (4 days, 13:56:06.500000), rspec-rails (1 day, 2:18:37)

Third Party Libraries (Framework + Ignored)
===========================================
Total PRs: 8391
Mean time to merge: 3 days, 20:52:04.355023
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: acts-as-taggable-on (146 days, 3:40:01), paper_trail (85 days, 7:45:33), rails-controller-testing (84 days, 3:29:26), mini_magick (41 days, 4:15:20), excon (41 days, 0:57:48)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: docker-compose (0:12:51), vcr (0:10:44), miller-columns-element (0:05:36), faraday_middleware (0:03:30), nltk (0:01:14)

All Allowed Libraries (Security + Internal + Framework)
=======================================================
Total PRs: 10216
Mean time to merge: 1 day, 22:23:05.722886
Max time to merge: 189 days, 5:50:39
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: gds-sso (38 days, 17:12:39), secure_headers (28 days, 4:50:14), factory_bot_rails (23 days, 4:31:45), doorkeeper (19 days, 7:14:41), excon (15 days, 7:26:22)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: govuk_publishing_components (0:42:20), sprockets (0:38:34), rack-protection (0:19:10), actionview (0:05:42), webrick (0:01:17)

Ignored Libraries
=================
Total PRs: 7378
Mean time to merge: 3 days, 15:19:59.342911
Max time to merge: 146 days, 3:40:01
Top 5 longest libraries to merge: acts-as-taggable-on (146 days, 3:40:01), paper_trail (85 days, 7:45:33), rails-controller-testing (84 days, 3:29:26), mini_magick (41 days, 4:15:20), excon (41 days, 0:57:48)
Top 5 quickest libraries to merge: docker-compose (0:12:51), vcr (0:10:44), miller-columns-element (0:05:36), faraday_middleware (0:03:30), nltk (0:01:14)
```
</details>

## Proposal

We will configure Dependabot to only raise PRs against libraries that fit within one of three categories. Any updates to libraries which don't fit into one of these categories will be ignored and PRs won't be raised for them.

The three categories are:

- [Security updates]
- Internal libraries - these are libraries written by us (for example `gds-api-adapters`, `govuk_publishing_components`)
- Framework libraries - these are libraries which our apps heavily rely on to work (for example `rails`, `rspec-rails`)

These categories have been chosen to ensure we stay up to date on libraries which are important to us while also reducing the number of unnecessary version bumps.

[Security updates]: https://help.github.com/en/github/managing-security-vulnerabilities/configuring-github-dependabot-security-updates#about-github-dependabot-security-updates

### Custom configuration

Dependabot [supports configuration files][dependabot-config] stored in each repo to customise its behaviour. This RFC proposes using a configuration file like the one detailed below in each of our repos.

We've already been trialing this out in [Content Publisher] and [govuk_publishing_components], based on some initial experiements in [Signon].

[dependabot-config]: https://dependabot.com/docs/config-file/
[Content Publisher]: https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/pull/2062
[govuk_publishing_components]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk_publishing_components/pull/1564
[Signon]: https://github.com/alphagov/signon/pull/1426

```yaml
version: 1
update_configs:
  - package_manager: ruby:bundler
    directory: /
    update_schedule: daily
    allowed_updates:
      # Security updates
      - match: { update_type: security }
      - match: { dependency_name: brakeman }
      # Internal gems
      - match: { dependency_name: gds-api-adapters }
      - match: { dependency_name: gds-sso }
      - match: { dependency_name: govspeak }
      - match: { dependency_name: govuk* }
      - match: { dependency_name: rubocop-govuk }
      - match: { dependency_name: plek }
      - match: { dependency_name: scss_lint-govuk }
      # Framework gems
      - match: { dependency_name: factory_bot }
      - match: { dependency_name: jasmine }
      - match: { dependency_name: rails }
      - match: { dependency_name: rspec }
      - match: { dependency_name: rspec-rails }
      - match: { dependency_name: sass-rails }
  - package_manager: javascript
    directory: /
    update_schedule: daily
    allowed_updates:
      # Security updates
      - match: { update_type: security }
      # Internal packages
      - match: { dependency_name: accessible-autocomplete }
      - match: { dependency_name: markdown-toolbar-element }
      - match: { dependency_name: miller-columns-element }
      - match: { dependency_name: paste-html-to-govspeak }
```

### Customisation

The majority of our applications have similar dependencies, but there are a few which use different libraries that we would want to be included in the list of allowed updates (for example `sinatra`). To support this, the example configuration above is a good starting point, but it can be tailored for the application. This also helps to support applications we've written in a different language to Ruby (for example Python).

Although we allow customisation of the configuration, the rules around the three categories of dependencies should be followed to ensure the configuration is consistent and understandable across all our repos. It also makes it easier to audit the configuration in the future, as each allowed update comes with a specific clear reason why it should be there.

### Possible alternatives

#### Auto-merge

The proposal in this RFC [came from an earlier discussion of enabling auto-merge on our PRs][auto-merge-discussion]. Auto-merge is a feature which means [version bump PRs will automatically be merged][auto-merge] by Dependabot provided the tests are passing and the necessary approvals have been received.

The idea is that by auto-merging our PRs, we wouldn't have to spend so much time dealing with them. However, there are a few reasons why this isn't possible at the moment:

- We require approvals for all our PRs. Merging in the PR isn't what takes up the time, so having them merge automatically would only shave off a small amount of time.
- The auto-merge functionality has to be enabled across the entire Dependabot account. We use a shared account across GDS. For this reason, and others, we [weren't able to turn it on][auto-merge-gds-way].

[auto-merge]: https://dependabot.com/blog/automatic-pull-request-merging/
[auto-merge-discussion]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/18P86EFSZdG8Uv5scbGzVoO8KhA3hkKp80UlzNoIctNE/edit
[auto-merge-gds-way]: https://github.com/alphagov/gds-way/pull/428#discussion_r426502446

#### Limit updates to lockfile

Another option might be to limit Dependabot to only raise PRs against the `Gemfile.lock` file. The lockfile is used to pin a specific version, whereas the `Gemfile` can contain a wider version range (for example `~> 1.0` means `1.0 all the way up to but not including 2.0`). The way this would be set up is that Gems we would want to update would have little to no restriction, whereas Gems we'd prefer to be left would have a more precise version specification.

Unfortunately applying this would mean [we lose the security updates that do require an update to the `Gemfile`][dependabot-security-lockfile].

[dependabot-security-lockfile]: https://github.com/dependabot/feedback/issues/937

#### Major/minor/patch

This solution proposed above ignores all updates for libraries not in one of the three categories, regardless of whether the update is a major, minor or patch update. An alternative might be to include PRs for major updates for other libraries.

Looking through the Dependabot config docs, [it doesn't seem to be possible to enable major updates][dependabot-allowed-updates]. Regardless, major updates tend to be the ones that take the longest time to merge, so enabling them wouldn't reduce much of the workload.

[dependabot-allowed-updates]: https://dependabot.com/docs/config-file/#allowed_updates

#### Opt-out rather than opt-in

Rather than having a list of libraries we allow updating, we could instead [maintain a list of libraries we ignore updates for][dependabot-ignored-updates].

This would allow us to remove the hardest PRs from updates, but it would require us to be more on top of maintaining the list. I'm also not sure how it would work with enabling security updates regardless.

[dependabot-ignored-updates]: https://dependabot.com/docs/config-file/#ignored_updates

## Consequences, risks and measuring success

### Workload

Using [the statistics from above](#Statistics), we can make some estimates on what affect this would have had if it had been enabled from the beginning: 7378 PRs wouldn't have been raised (10216 rather than the 17526 we've had so far).

We should also expect to see a reduction in the number of open PRs, and also a reduction in the number of deployments.

A less measurable metric is that we would expect developers to be spending less time fixing issues in Dependabot PRs.

### Out of date libraries

In theory, by limiting the number of libraries that get updated by Dependabot, our applications would end up less up to date. However, by prioritising certain libraries over others, we should end up in a situation where our applications are actually _more_ up to date in the areas we care about (security, frameworks, internal libraries). There is a risk involved in not being able to access new features or fixes from ignored libraries, however the reason the library has been ignored is because we're making little use of it in the app (otherwise it should be a framework library). We can always manually upgrade these libraries when we want to, and that should still be encouraged when doing a major update (for example a Rails upgrade).

### Inconsistent configuration

This RFC allows repos to fully customise the configuration, ensuring that it's tailored towards the needs of the application. This works for our apps which are more bespoke, however the majority of our applications use a similar set of libraries (most notably Rails and Rspec). There is potential for the configuration between different apps to become inconsistent, however we anticipate that dependency changes don't happen often enough for this to be a problem.

The original version of this RFC mandated a system that would keep the individual configuration files with a global configuration file up to date automatically. This is included below should we decide to go down this route in the future if we discover that updating the configuration files manually takes too much work:

> Maintaining this file across each of our apps has the potential for it to become out of date with our global configuration. To solve this problem, this RFC proposes that we add functionality to [govuk-saas-config] which ensures the configuration file in each repo is up to date with a single global configuration file. Keeping up to date means ensuring that the individual repo configuration file contains at least the global configuration options plus any extra framework libraries that are used by specific apps (for example `sinatra`) but not used wider across all our apps.

> Due to the fact that the configuration file is stored in the Git repo, [govuk-saas-config] will need to raise a PR to keep the configuration in sync rather than writing to the repo directly. This is similar to a script we have for [upgrading Ruby].

[govuk-saas-config]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-saas-config
[upgrading Ruby]: https://github.com/thomasleese/upgrade-ruby-version/blob/7d43077a10c732fc285e0bd6daad2d2c5740e352/main.py#L203-L207

### Review period

To ensure that we're confident this RFC has had a positive impact on our dependency management propose, we propose a six month review once the configuration file has been deployed to all our apps.

The review will look to understand whether we've had a reduction in workflow as anticipated and whether the process of manually maintaining the configuration files is workable. This will be achieved by talking to developers and using some updated statistics. This review will be owned by the Platform Health team.

If we see a situation where most days we don't have any new Dependabot PRs, we could think about losening these restrictions and opening up the number of libraries we want to received updates on.
