rfc-178-update-asset-lifecycle-via-publishing-api.md, before:

---
status: proposed
implementation: proposed
status_last_reviewed:
---

# Update Asset Lifecycle State via Publishing API Message Queue

## Summary

Currently, each publishing application updates the state of each asset associated with an edition of a document when the edition's state changes. For example, when an edition is published, Whitehall updates the `draft` state of any assets associated with the edition to `false` by making an API call to Asset Manager. This will cause Asset Manager to serve the asset from the live domain. Other publishing applications which support asset uploads, such as Specialist Publisher and Manuals Publisher, make the same API call each time a document is published.

To reduce this duplication and reduce the chatty API connections between the publishing applications and Asset Manager, we could have Asset Manager consume messages placed on RabbitMQ by Publishing API whenever an edition's state is updated. The message processor could then inspect the state of the edition's attachments and images and apply the appropriate updates to the relevant asset states, for example by updating the redirect URL associated with the assets if the edition has been unpublished.

## Problem

GOV.UK publishing has found asset management a difficult challenge in recent history. It has been the source of several incidents and bugs, such as [this high profile incident](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1niSvK0w-BkzHpkqj6-yqcHrRPI4OfYhOfHn5paEQH7Q/edit?usp=sharing) from 2024, and [this extant bug in Manuals Publisher](https://trello.com/c/5LqwCypV). There are two main problems:

1. Each publishing app which supports asset uploads has duplicate code for updating the state of Asset Manager.
2. The code for synchronising the state of Asset Manager with the state of Publishing API in the publishing applications is generally very brittle and sensitive to race conditions.

## Proposal

There SHOULD be a single mechanism for updating the state of an asset based on the owning edition's state. This SHOULD be achieved via Publishing API, which will reduce the burden on the publishing applications to maintain consistency between Publishing API and Asset Manager. This will make the data flow consistent with how Search API and Router API are updated, and decouple the publishing applications from Asset Manager.

In this scenario, publishing applications MUST upload binary assets directly to Asset Manager (as per the current process). Asset Manager can set the default lifecycle state for new assets as follows:

```ruby
{
  draft: true,
  deleted_at: nil,
  parent_document_url: nil,
  replacement_id: nil,
  redirect_url: nil,
}
```

For new assets, we COULD provide the necessary auth bypass ID and access limiting organisation IDs with the original asset, but it would be preferable not to do that if we can avoid it. Ideally the only path to setting this data would be via Publishing API. To enable this, we COULD create a new piece of state in Asset Manager which prevents serving the asset until a first update to the edition is processed.

After this, publishing applications must continue to include sufficient information about attachments and images in Publishing API payloads to allow Asset Manager to make appropriate state updates. Attachments sent to Publishing API by Whitehall look like this:

```json
{
    "accessible": false,
    "alternative_format_contact_email": "different.format@hmrc.gov.uk",
    "attachment_type": "file",
    "command_paper_number": "",
    "content_type": "application/vnd.oasis.opendocument.text",
    "file_size": 11349,
    "filename": "Amendments_5_to_8_to_Clause_37-Claim_for_relief_on_foreign_income.odt",
    "hoc_paper_number": "",
    "id": "8485786",
    "isbn": "",
    "title": "Amendments 5 to 8 to Clause 37: Claim for relief on foreign income",
    "unique_reference": "",
    "unnumbered_command_paper": false,
    "unnumbered_hoc_paper": false,
    "url": "https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/67bf19a4750837d7604dbb96/Amendments_5_to_8_to_Clause_37-Claim_for_relief_on_foreign_income.odt"
}
```

Asset Manager's ID for the asset is part of the attachment URL, but we MAY provide it as a separate field so that Asset Manager can easily perform a lookup for the correct asset. We MUST add a deletion marker and the replacement ID (if replaced) to the attachment data to allow Asset Manager to make the correct state adjustments for attachment assets. Deleted and replaced attachments MUST be filtered out of the data sent to content store.

Images look like this:

```json
{
  "alt_text": "The launch of the Amelia Troubridge photography exhibition at Getty Images Gallery, London.",
  "caption": "The launch of the Amelia Troubridge photography exhibition at Getty Images Gallery, London.",
  "high_resolution_url": "https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/image_data/file/65710/s960_Fanzi-Down.jpg",
  "url": "https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/image_data/file/65710/s300_Fanzi-Down.jpg"
}
```

Again, we MAY include the Asset Manager IDs for each image, and we MUST provide deletion and replacement state. Deleted and replaced images MUST be filtered out of the data sent to content store.

Publishing API already places a message on a RabbitMQ exchange each time an edition is published. We MUST add another topic for updates to draft editions so that Asset Manager can make additional updates to access limiting and access bypass states for draft documents. This may also be useful in the future to provide draft stack capability for Search API.

Unpublishings look like this:

```json
{
  "analytics_identifier": null,
  "base_path": "/guidance/brexit-guidance-for-individuals-and-families",
  "content_id": null,
  "description": null,
  "details": {

  },
  "document_type": "redirect",
  "first_published_at": "2021-07-01T11:33:00+01:00",
  "links": {

  },
  "locale": "en",
  "phase": "live",
  "public_updated_at": "2022-05-09T12:37:43+01:00",
  "publishing_app": "whitehall",
  "publishing_request_id": null,
  "publishing_scheduled_at": null,
  "redirects": [
    {
      "destination": "/government/collections/brexit-guidance",
      "path": "/guidance/brexit-guidance-for-individuals-and-families",
      "type": "exact"
    }
  ],
  "rendering_app": null,
  "scheduled_publishing_delay_seconds": null,
  "schema_name": "redirect",
  "title": null,
  "updated_at": "2025-01-21T14:44:13+00:00",
  "withdrawn_notice": {

  }
}
```

We MUST add a way to look up assets belonging to unpublished editions so that they can be redirected. We COULD add the asset IDs for each attachment and image to the redirect, or we COULD create a separate `unpublished_documents` topic to handle these events. It is likely that the easiest thing to do would be to include the attachment data in the unpublishing details.

## Implementation

Asset Manager can use the `GovukMessageQueueConsumer` to consume RabbitMQ messages from the `published_documents` topic. Here is how Search API consumes the queue: https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/blob/main/lib/tasks/message_queue.rake.

As mentioned above, we MUST add a new topic for draft documents.

The message processing code MUST be retryable, and SHOULD use an exponential backoff strategy. RabbitMQ does not enable such behaviour out of the box, so we COULD write the messages to another form of storage (most likely Asset Manager's existing MongoDB database) and then read the messages back in a retryable Sidekiq job. This would be an improvement to the Search API workflow which writes the message directly to the Sidekiq Redis instance, causing the Redis memory to become very full when jobs are building up faster than workers can handle the jobs. Alternatively we COULD adopt the strategy used by GOV.UK Chat, which uses a [separate delay retry queue](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-chat/blob/main/lib/tasks/message_queue.rake) with a constant backoff so that we can avoid the unnecessary use of Sidekiq.

We MUST ensure that data consistency is maintained even if messages arrive at Asset Manager from the Publishing API out-of-order. To achieve this, we COULD apply the same strategy as Content Store and Search API by checking the payload version of each message. If the asset has been updated by a more recent message than the version included in the current message, then the message should be dropped.

We SHOULD initially restrict the message processor to only process messages where the document has a publishing app of Whitehall. Once we have proven that we can manage asset lifecycle state via Publishing API for Whitehall assets, we can migrate other publishing applications to use the same system.

## Diagrams

Currently, the asset and document lifecycle looks like this:

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': { 'background': '#ffffff' }}}%%
C4Container
    title System Container Diagram for Asset Lifecycle Management

    Person(user, "Publishing User", "A user of the publishing system")
    Person(public, "Public User", "A user of GOV.UK")

    Container_Boundary(c1, "Publishing System") {
        System(publishing_api, "Publishing API", "Handles publishing events and updates")
        System(whitehall, "Whitehall", "A publishing application")
        System(asset_manager, "Asset Manager", "Manages the lifecycle of assets")
    }

    Rel(user, whitehall, "Uses")
    Rel(whitehall, publishing_api, "Sends publishing events to")
    Rel(whitehall, asset_manager, "Sends asset uploads and publishing events to")
    Rel(asset_manager, public, "Views assets on")
```

You can see in the diagram above that for each change to an attachment or image Whitehall has to send requests to both Asset Manager and Publishing API. There is a chance that one of the requests may fail, or may succeed but only after a delay, leaving the system in an inconsistent state. It isn't unusual for example, for Publishing API to reject an unpublishing because of an invalid redirect URL. However, in this situation Asset Manager would still unpublish the assets.

If this proposal is enacted, it would look like the below C4 container diagram.

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': { 'background': '#ffffff' }}}%%
C4Container
    title System Container Diagram for Asset Lifecycle Management

    Person(user, "Publishing User", "A user of the publishing system")
    Person(public, "Public User", "A user of GOV.UK")

    Container_Boundary(c1, "Publishing System") {
        System(whitehall, "Whitehall", "A publishing application")
        System(publishing_api, "Publishing API", "Handles publishing events and updates")
        System(rabbitmq, "RabbitMQ", "Message broker for publishing events")
        System(asset_manager, "Asset Manager", "Manages the lifecycle of assets")
    }

    Rel(user, whitehall, "Uses")
    Rel(whitehall, asset_manager, "Uploads assets to")
    Rel(whitehall, publishing_api, "Sends publishing events to")
    Rel(publishing_api, rabbitmq, "Publishes messages to")
    Rel(rabbitmq, asset_manager, "Sends messages to")
    Rel(asset_manager, public, "Views assets on")
```

In the diagram above, you can see that the flow of data is now unidirectional after the initial asset upload. There are no conditions under which Asset Manager might accept an update to a document, but Publishing API might not. This should increase the robustness of the publishing system.

Commit message:

Add notes responding to feedback from ChrisBAshton <christopher.ashton@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk>
Added notes on the following:

- Handling legacy Whitehall asset IDs
- Link to Search API draft stack tech debt ticket
- Removed reference to Router API, which no longer exists, and replaced with reference to Email Alerts.

rfc-178-update-asset-lifecycle-via-publishing-api.md, after:

---
status: proposed
implementation: proposed
status_last_reviewed:
---

# Update Asset Lifecycle State via Publishing API Message Queue

## Summary

Currently, each publishing application updates the state of each asset associated with an edition of a document when the edition's state changes. For example, when an edition is published, Whitehall updates the `draft` state of any assets associated with the edition to `false` by making an API call to Asset Manager. This will cause Asset Manager to serve the asset from the live domain. Other publishing applications which support asset uploads, such as Specialist Publisher and Manuals Publisher, make the same API call each time a document is published.

To reduce this duplication and reduce the chatty API connections between the publishing applications and Asset Manager, we could have Asset Manager consume messages placed on RabbitMQ by Publishing API whenever an edition's state is updated. The message processor could then inspect the state of the edition's attachments and images and apply the appropriate updates to the relevant asset states, for example by updating the redirect URL associated with the assets if the edition has been unpublished.

## Problem

GOV.UK publishing has found asset management a difficult challenge in recent history. It has been the source of several incidents and bugs, such as [this high profile incident](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1niSvK0w-BkzHpkqj6-yqcHrRPI4OfYhOfHn5paEQH7Q/edit?usp=sharing) from 2024, and [this extant bug in Manuals Publisher](https://trello.com/c/5LqwCypV). There are two main problems:

1. Each publishing app which supports asset uploads has duplicate code for updating the state of Asset Manager.
2. The code for synchronising the state of Asset Manager with the state of Publishing API in the publishing applications is generally very brittle and sensitive to race conditions.

## Proposal

There SHOULD be a single mechanism for updating the state of an asset based on the owning edition's state. This SHOULD be achieved via Publishing API, which will reduce the burden on the publishing applications to maintain consistency between Publishing API and Asset Manager. This will make the data flow consistent with how Search API and Email Alert API are updated, and decouple the publishing applications from Asset Manager.

In this scenario, publishing applications MUST upload binary assets directly to Asset Manager (as per the current process). Asset Manager can set the default lifecycle state for new assets as follows:

```ruby
{
  draft: true,
  deleted_at: nil,
  parent_document_url: nil,
  replacement_id: nil,
  redirect_url: nil,
}
```

For new assets, we COULD provide the necessary auth bypass ID and access limiting organisation IDs with the original asset, but it would be preferable not to do that if we can avoid it. Ideally the only path to setting this data would be via Publishing API. To enable this, we COULD create a new piece of state in Asset Manager which prevents serving the asset until a first update to the edition is processed.

After this, publishing applications must continue to include sufficient information about attachments and images in Publishing API payloads to allow Asset Manager to make appropriate state updates. Attachments sent to Publishing API by Whitehall look like this:

```json
{
    "accessible": false,
    "alternative_format_contact_email": "different.format@hmrc.gov.uk",
    "attachment_type": "file",
    "command_paper_number": "",
    "content_type": "application/vnd.oasis.opendocument.text",
    "file_size": 11349,
    "filename": "Amendments_5_to_8_to_Clause_37-Claim_for_relief_on_foreign_income.odt",
    "hoc_paper_number": "",
    "id": "8485786",
    "isbn": "",
    "title": "Amendments 5 to 8 to Clause 37: Claim for relief on foreign income",
    "unique_reference": "",
    "unnumbered_command_paper": false,
    "unnumbered_hoc_paper": false,
    "url": "https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/67bf19a4750837d7604dbb96/Amendments_5_to_8_to_Clause_37-Claim_for_relief_on_foreign_income.odt"
}
```

Asset Manager's ID for the asset is part of the attachment URL (except for in some legacy Whitehall assets), but we MAY provide it as a separate field so that Asset Manager can easily perform a lookup for the correct asset. [Work has already started to do that in Whitehall](https://github.com/alphagov/whitehall/pull/9641). If there are any assets that only have a legacy Whitehall ID, we MUST ensure that those assets receive a new ID as well. We MUST add a deletion marker and the replacement ID (if replaced) to the attachment data to allow Asset Manager to make the correct state adjustments for attachment assets. Deleted and replaced attachments MUST be filtered out of the data sent to content store.

Images look like this:

```json
{
  "alt_text": "The launch of the Amelia Troubridge photography exhibition at Getty Images Gallery, London.",
  "caption": "The launch of the Amelia Troubridge photography exhibition at Getty Images Gallery, London.",
  "high_resolution_url": "https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/image_data/file/65710/s960_Fanzi-Down.jpg",
  "url": "https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/image_data/file/65710/s300_Fanzi-Down.jpg"
}
```

Again, we MAY include the Asset Manager IDs for each image, and we MUST provide deletion and replacement state. Deleted and replaced images MUST be filtered out of the data sent to content store.

Publishing API already places a message on a RabbitMQ exchange each time an edition is published. We MUST add another topic for updates to draft editions so that Asset Manager can make additional updates to access limiting and access bypass states for draft documents. This may also be useful in the future to provide draft stack capability for Search API (see [related tech debt card](https://trello.com/c/5nN8vKG7/600-create-draft-search-index-to-enable-draft-search-preview)).

Unpublishings look like this:

```json
{
  "analytics_identifier": null,
  "base_path": "/guidance/brexit-guidance-for-individuals-and-families",
  "content_id": null,
  "description": null,
  "details": {

  },
  "document_type": "redirect",
  "first_published_at": "2021-07-01T11:33:00+01:00",
  "links": {

  },
  "locale": "en",
  "phase": "live",
  "public_updated_at": "2022-05-09T12:37:43+01:00",
  "publishing_app": "whitehall",
  "publishing_request_id": null,
  "publishing_scheduled_at": null,
  "redirects": [
    {
      "destination": "/government/collections/brexit-guidance",
      "path": "/guidance/brexit-guidance-for-individuals-and-families",
      "type": "exact"
    }
  ],
  "rendering_app": null,
  "scheduled_publishing_delay_seconds": null,
  "schema_name": "redirect",
  "title": null,
  "updated_at": "2025-01-21T14:44:13+00:00",
  "withdrawn_notice": {

  }
}
```

We MUST add a way to look up assets belonging to unpublished editions so that they can be redirected. We COULD add the asset IDs for each attachment and image to the redirect, or we COULD create a separate `unpublished_documents` topic to handle these events. It is likely that the easiest thing to do would be to include the attachment data in the unpublishing details, but there might be additional value in having a separate topic.

## Implementation

Asset Manager can use the `GovukMessageQueueConsumer` to consume RabbitMQ messages from the `published_documents` topic. Here is how Search API consumes the queue: https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/blob/main/lib/tasks/message_queue.rake.

As mentioned above, we MUST add a new topic for draft documents.

The message processing code MUST be retryable, and SHOULD use an exponential backoff strategy. RabbitMQ does not enable such behaviour out of the box, so we COULD write the messages to another form of storage (most likely Asset Manager's existing MongoDB database) and then read the messages back in a retryable Sidekiq job. This would be an improvement to the Search API workflow which writes the message directly to the Sidekiq Redis instance, causing the Redis memory to become very full when jobs are building up faster than workers can handle the jobs. Alternatively we COULD adopt the strategy used by GOV.UK Chat, which uses a [separate delay retry queue](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-chat/blob/main/lib/tasks/message_queue.rake) with a constant backoff so that we can avoid the unnecessary use of Sidekiq.

We MUST ensure that data consistency is maintained even if messages arrive at Asset Manager from the Publishing API out-of-order. To achieve this, we COULD apply the same strategy as Content Store and Search API by checking the payload version of each message. If the asset has been updated by a more recent message than the version included in the current message, then the message should be dropped.

We SHOULD initially restrict the message processor to only process messages where the document has a publishing app of Whitehall. Once we have proven that we can manage asset lifecycle state via Publishing API for Whitehall assets, we can migrate other publishing applications to use the same system.

## Diagrams

Currently, the asset and document lifecycle looks like this:

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': { 'background': '#ffffff' }}}%%
C4Container
    title System Container Diagram for Asset Lifecycle Management

    Person(user, "Publishing User", "A user of the publishing system")
    Person(public, "Public User", "A user of GOV.UK")

    Container_Boundary(c1, "Publishing System") {
        System(publishing_api, "Publishing API", "Handles publishing events and updates")
        System(whitehall, "Whitehall", "A publishing application")
        System(asset_manager, "Asset Manager", "Manages the lifecycle of assets")
    }

    Rel(user, whitehall, "Uses")
    Rel(whitehall, publishing_api, "Sends publishing events to")
    Rel(whitehall, asset_manager, "Sends asset uploads and publishing events to")
    Rel(asset_manager, public, "Views assets on")
```

You can see in the diagram above that for each change to an attachment or image Whitehall has to send requests to both Asset Manager and Publishing API. There is a chance that one of the requests may fail, or may succeed but only after a delay, leaving the system in an inconsistent state. It isn't unusual for example, for Publishing API to reject an unpublishing because of an invalid redirect URL. However, in this situation Asset Manager would still unpublish the assets.

If this proposal is enacted, it would look like the below C4 container diagram.

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': { 'background': '#ffffff' }}}%%
C4Container
    title System Container Diagram for Asset Lifecycle Management

    Person(user, "Publishing User", "A user of the publishing system")
    Person(public, "Public User", "A user of GOV.UK")

    Container_Boundary(c1, "Publishing System") {
        System(whitehall, "Whitehall", "A publishing application")
        System(publishing_api, "Publishing API", "Handles publishing events and updates")
        System(rabbitmq, "RabbitMQ", "Message broker for publishing events")
        System(asset_manager, "Asset Manager", "Manages the lifecycle of assets")
    }

    Rel(user, whitehall, "Uses")
    Rel(whitehall, asset_manager, "Uploads assets to")
    Rel(whitehall, publishing_api, "Sends publishing events to")
    Rel(publishing_api, rabbitmq, "Publishes messages to")
    Rel(rabbitmq, asset_manager, "Sends messages to")
    Rel(asset_manager, public, "Views assets on")
```

In the diagram above, you can see that the flow of data is now unidirectional after the initial asset upload. There are no conditions under which Asset Manager might accept an update to a document, but Publishing API might not. This should increase the robustness of the publishing system.
